

I didn’t plan for this but when the stars align, your Eres swimsuit matches the Wes Anderson-inspired beach chairs at the One&Only Resort in Dubai, and voilá - magic happens! Expect nothing less when staying here, as the resort is truly magical and unique.

Soho Farmhouse is a 100 acre members' club in Oxfordshire that brings together marvellous people from the creative fields and offers them an amazing experience in the English countryside. My stay at the farmhouse was as relaxing as it was exciting with its many facilities and outdoor activities such as horseback-riding and swimming. The only problem? Leaving it!

Located in my favourite part of New York, the SoHo Sant Ambroeus restaurant is literally a smargosbord of delicious, authentic Milanese treats. Having already eaten my way through the menu, this time around I tried their avocado toast which is heavenly. Yes folks, Italians do it better - even avocado toast.

In early December I've had the pleasure to visit one of Berlin's historic post-war buildings and world's first concept mall, an incredible space overlooking the German capital's zoo. If you are around go there and see the awesome Christmas installment by Stills and Strokes, one more great art addition to this space's brilliance.

Waking up to thousands of green parrots flying over your majestic colonial villa, walking through the exotic gardens next to your regular friends, the peacocks, emptying your mind around the 18th century Shiva temple, every of the meals...a treat, the service beyond of everything you've ever experienced, making you feel like you're home. If there's heaven, I guess I've already found it. Special thanks to the real gem of Rajvilas, the manager Mr Abhishek, the most attentive person I've ever met and the Jimmy Choo team that has made my stay out of this world. 


The concept of a traveling fashionista wasn’t very hard to see, the models had boarding tags in their hair and on their clothes. The hair and makeup did not go unnoticed, the amazing Eugene Souleiman and the legendary Pat McGrath stood behind the creative and fun looks.

Seeing sneakers at a couture show isn’t something you usually witness, but doing so was refreshing and if someone could pull it off, it would be the great John Galliano.

Beautiful pictures. It is nice to notice the idea behind these dresses; woman in a rush.
Thanks
xoxox

seryfashion.wordpress.com

I LOVE Maison Margiela, you’re so lucky that you’ve been there! Especially John Galliano is a pure genius and he was one of my most fav designers at House of Dior. The work he does for Margiela is amazing and I think they didn’t have a better designer because his creativity is endless.

ellecitychocolate.blogspot.cz

I can’t begin to try and understand or dissect the work of John Galliano. As a creative being I am in awe of the great work of John Galliano, I’m so glad he’s back !!
Jandrew
Dress The Part
http://www.jandrewspeaks.com





Spending severals days in the slopes of the French Alps was a dream even for me, not by any means a professional skier (surprise surprise). This ski trip was no ordinary ski-trip though – usually you enjoy the snowy slopes on them but I got to experience the mountains from ABOVE. We went on private helicopter ride and soaked in the breathtaking view of the majestic mountain tops.

Net-A-Porter is the definitely the host with the most surprises, events, atmosphere, love and last but not least – with the best wardrobe for every occasion.

Check out my winter essentials below!

Gold tone Gucci sunnies

Chic and warm snow booties by Chloé

Perfect Moment ski-suit

Punk leather ankle boots by The Row

Burberry mix of knits sweater

YSL long silhouette clutch

Over-the-knee conical heel leather boots by Isabel Marant

Isabel Marant velvet wide leg pants

Great pics! x

http://www.evdaily.blogspot.com





Here I’m wearing a dragonfruit-colored Rosie Assoulin shirt, paired with kitten-heeled Chanel pumps and topped off with Linda Farrow sunnies.

Red might just be every woman’s color!



Love your photos and their vibe.
parinazshahmoradi.com

Such a beautiful dress!

http://www.evdaily.blogspot.com





Acclaimed for his distinctly glamorous and seductive designs, Peter Dundas’ eponymous label is all about that and some more. His black S/S17 shimmering dress is my favorite piece from his debut collection, and it truly is the perfect LBD to channel you inner diva.

Dare to wear stockings that match your shoes! My monochrome look is complete with these gorgeous coco leather mules by The Row. You can try this look with any color of the rainbow though.

This gorgeous cozy red coat from Common Leisure is Christmas in a garment, so say goodbye to ugly Christmas sweaters and say hello to chic staple pieces that work for the holidays and any other day for that matter!


With one of the hottest tickets in the world of fashion I have the honor to magically teleport you to Pierpaolo Piccoli's incredibly beautiful world, the world of Valentino. Maison Valentino's SS17 Haute Couture show was not just another Haute-Couture moment but a dream skillfully translated into reality. Actually, it is Pierpaolo's dream, the sole creative director of the house, who artfully orchestrated a very modern fairytale whose significance will be remembered for years. Not only because he feasted our senses with the goose bumping intensity of the exclusive musical score by the great Master Alexandre Desplat but also because he just gave to fashion the biggest lesson: That simplicity is the greatest ability. Graceful shapes and cuts, sculpted pleats, chiffon braids, delicate hand stitched frills, a marvel of minimalism, divine creatures floating like billowing clouds, opening a getaway to the sky. A triumph of craftsmanship. Brava Pierpaolo.

All the pictures are great and awesome. Loving the collection of dresses. Priceless!
https://tagapparels.com

Hope you’re going to some great shows at NYFW! Looking forward to more editorials 

http://www.aryachic.com/fashion-roundup-w-e-2-5-17

I loved this collection,  so  simple yet so chic! 

http://www.aryachic.com/must-have-high-low-dress





I'm in love with the way that this adorable Louis Vuitton Perfume set looks and what's more perfect than a perfume for every mood? These little beauties range from light, floral scents to deeper smokier ones for colder times. This also happens to be the most perfect gift for the indecisive soul, am I right?

This gorgeous red mini-skirt is perfect for your Christmas party or any other party where you're feeling extra. Alessandra has quickly become one of my go-to designers for flirty, feminine, chic.

La creme main is my knight in shining armour during the cold winter times. Especially with its practical and cute packaging, you can moisturise everywhere and it fits in any bag. Having soft hands is key, and never to be neglected boys and girls!


Imagine one bare-foot week and snorkeling among a wild selection of coral just on the doorstep of your villa. Bonus...the best mochi in the world at the ZEN restaurant. Dreams actually exist.

With its own white-sand beach and surrounded by 5 spectacular forests, the Sarojin is the place that enables you to relax, unwind and recharge. Having one of the best guest services that I’ve ever witnessed, Sarojin is the ideal destination in Thailand. I’ll definitely be back.




Photography Sun Sun Leung
 In collaboration with The Landmark Mandarin Oriental Hong Kong

Burberry trench coat/Vetements Denim/Vetements turtleneck/ Gucci loafers/ Rag & Bone camisole. Bag by Mark Cross.

Love a good wi-fi connection on plane.

Who would’ve ever thought that someone would  actually communicate, in our case post, from the airspace. Sounds extraterrestrial yet this is real human evolution guys. I hope next year to speak on this space about finding cures and miracle medicines. It will make me so much happier.

So here I am on my way back home from Los Angeles, having a panic attack (and if I’m not I’m almost there), not because of the altitude but because I’ve realized that I haven’t talked to you at all about my Burberry trench coat experience at the Landmark Mandarin Oriental Hong Kong the only Mandarin Oriental in the world with a silver fan (the rest of them have gold).

At the beginning of January I’ve had the great pleasure to stay at their redesigned and absolutely beautiful suite L900 to experience five Burberry-ultra-spoiling days. The MO Landmark joined forces with the iconic British house and until the end of February all the guests of this suite may wear the heritage Burberry trench coat and enjoy the “My Burberry” fragrance during their stay, complementing with an exclusive private in-suite styling consultation. I totally loved this experience. The suite was beyond chic in cool neutrals, like white and grey, that gave it a contemporary appeal and a mix of vintage-modern furniture. Not to mention the pal next door who was no other than the Landmark mall, one of the best shopping destinations globally.

What? Need some Hong Kong getaway? I totally get it….

Hi, Love your look as always. I was just wondering which nailcolour your wearing…

Thanks a lot

The Burberry trench is such a classic I adore. The hotel suite looks gorgeous, it must have been a wonderful visit.
Hugs Adele xoxo

lovely pics!

xx
http://www.cherry-mag.com





I chose a pair of gorgeous, red suede pumps with  playful tassels from Aquazzura that I paired with wide high-waisted pants and a cozy over-sized knitted sweater from Joseph.

And for those occasions when you want to channel your inner intergalactic 60’s bombshell these low blue sparkly booties from Pedder Red are perfect.

I also went for these glamourous, sparkly pumps from Jimmy Choo as well. Whether you wear them with wide pants or a cute little number, they’re your go-to party Choo’s (hah!).

Last but not least, I also fell in love with these velvet, emerald green, everyday boots. I feel like velvet isn’t just a fad but here to stay, and boy am I glad it is!

Click here to check out my entire selection!

Wow. These pictures are stunning and so high level. You are very classy and creative.
Thanks
xoxox

seryfashion.wordpress.com

Love them all!
parinazshahmoradi.com

Great post! 

http://www.evdaily.blogspot.comI am in love with these light-weight body oils from Chanel that leave your body feeling supple and soft and give a beautiful healthy glow. They come in four different amazing scents depending on which mood you're in but they are all a part of the chance experience.

What does one wear to a Valentino Couture show? Valentino of course! I picked this little S/S18 number that matches the majestic decor of the Hôtel Salomon de Rothschild where the show was held. It's sweet as candy and chic as only Valentino can be.

A lip and cheek tint is THE travel essential. When you don't feel like wearing a full face of make-up, you can lightly put it on for a healthy pop of colour anywhere on your face. It’s also waterproof making sure you look cute outside as well as in the water. PS! Paired with a glamorous choker from Isabel Marant.


My travelling patterns are much like an espresso, short and intense and with a lot of sugar thanks to the host with the most – Michael Kors! Last week I went to Shanghai for the first time ever, to celebrate the The Walk event.

When I arrived at the Waldorf Astoria, not only was I greeted by the most spectacular view of the skyline, the MK fam remembered my favourite flower and had beautiful white roses arranged by my bed and a gorgeous goodie bag of course.

Before the event, we went on an amazing tour of the city and stopped by the majestic Jing’an Temple. This is what I love about Shanghai, the old, traditional lives side by side in perfect harmony with the ultra modern. The city is dynamic and has something interesting for everyone, no matter what you’re into.

To the The Walk event I was channeling a bit of disco diva, and went for a dazzling metallic leopard dress. My favourite accessory however was, and still is of course, the Sofie smartwatch. I didn’t think I was going to be such a nerd about it but seriously, it is so handy and I use it all the time. It gives me everything from traffic notifications, to message alerts to, and most important, a great finish to any look. There’s no styling trick to it really, but if you want  to mix it up a bit, wear it over chunky sleeve to accentuate the watch even more!



Beautiful!

http://www.evdaily.blogspot.com





White swimsuit by Eres 

Satin slides by The Row 

Robe from Asceno 

Beautiful detailed photos!
http://www.parinazshahmoradi.com

I love it all, so cute!
-Gabby
http://www.orcuttfamilydentistry.com

Your photography for your photos are absolutely stunning! I love your silk dress in the second to last photo with the gold chain. The chain really is the perfect touch, simple and elegant. That dress would look great with a pair of gold hoop earrings as an extra accessory and a pair of Celine rounded sunglasses.  https://www.lensntrends.com

Great!

http://www.evdaily.blogspot.com



Valentino Rockstud Spike bag| Valentino dress| Valentino tights| Valentino sandals

Photography Haris Farsarakis

It’s a new dawn / It’s a new day / It’s a new life…and we’re feeling good Mr Pierpaolo Piccioli!

Yes it’s a new era for my favorite House of magic Valentino under the creative direction of Pierpaolo Piccioli and the depicted Rockstud Spike bag, represents the first sign of the Historic House’s new path.

And If I can judge from these baby steps into this new world, It’s gonna be young, edgy, unconditional and uber cool.

For the Rockstud spike bag couture becomes trend thanks to an artisanal quilted technique a scene of studs enlightens its surface as if it being a punk dotting. My favorite piece of the bag tho is the handle as it’s super adjustable, a super fun accessory that can be adjusted to you mood and personality.

The future looks so bright at Maison Valentino.

 

Photos are amazing
https://www.etsy.com/shop/HatsAndOtherStories

Beautiful handbag. For designer bag, please check out:  https://www.lululook.com/collections/womens-bags

beautiful!

http://bit.ly/2gIDhIc

Exceptionally gorgeous! Love how flowy the dress is! 🙂

Delilo | http://www.delilostyle.com

makeup products of winter

What a beautiful outfit! <3

http://ariadibari.com





“A new beginning demands a certain forgetfulness. In order to rewrite history one should forget about it and retain the essence, moving quickly and irreverently to explore the pleasures of metamorphosis.
Actions should be quick, guided by taste that edits, chooses, combines, unites: elongating, narrowing, keeping time as a value on the surface of things; stripping away of the superfluous to add intensity.
Eras should be crossed in an accelerated supercut, drawing an imaginary line that brings Hieronymus Bosch, the visionary inventor of fantastic heavens and hells, close to Sandra Rhodes, who has been invited to reinterpret the artist’s imagery with her pure and innocent lines.”

That said from Pierpaolo Piccioli on his debut show as the sole creative director of Valentino. I won’t talk much, I will just let you feast your eyes on his breathtaking collection with only one wish….All the new beginnings to be like Pierpaolo’s: EPIC.

Impecable,la caida y los cortes son un sueño
Me guata el juego de los colores

What blog creating site do you use?

What a beautiful collection!

https://blog.elaineturner.com/





The Valentino woman has taken a sportier turn but stays true to its romantic roots and glamorous self.

Pierpaolo you are the fresh air out there, yet already a legend!



Wow! Such an awesome collection! Loving the pastel colors particularly! 

The Glam Agent 

http://www.theglamagent.com/2017/10/the-best-way-to-care-for-your-skin.html?m=1

Loved the outfits! Thank you so much for the pictures, very inspiring!
xoxox

seryfashion.wordpress.com

Love this! x

http://www.evdaily.blogspot.com





What I love about Delpozo collections in particular is that the concept runs through all looks, and entire looks – head to toe, making every detail worth our attention. My favorite looks were with the playful, bicolored tulles and head pieces.

Thank you Josep for the splash of fun and beauty during New York Fashion Week!



I admire his work! Well written article as well!

Love the collection! Especially the colours used in the designs <3
http://www.parinazshahmoradi.com





The Chanel Fall 2017 couture show was a triumphant celebration of Coco Chanel and the city in which she lived; evident by a scale replica of the Eiffel Tower in the middle of Grand Palais. The set design may have filled Instagram feeds today, but it was the breath-taking collection that filled our hearts with admiration for the Parisian je-ne-sais-quoi and awe for the style that is characteristic of the undisputed fashion capital of the world.

Tweeds and leathers dominated the runway today, embellished with feathers and finished off with beautiful boater hats. The shoes were sublime too, all in patent leather in various lengths (I’m very, very tempted by the knee-high ones).

Karl Lagerfeld creates a unique world around each collection and within these worlds live the most exquisite Haute Couture pieces that I am so lucky to experience.

Thank you Chanel!


In love with the patent leather boots. Both over the knee and the mid high ones look so nice! 😍

Love the collection! And those leather boots!
http://www.parinazshahmoradi.com

Love it!

https://www.antorini.com

Absolutely love it!

http://www.evdaily.blogspot.com





The #VLTNTokyo pop-up in Shibuya blows EVERY other pop-up out of the water. Valentino threw the best party in town (KOHH performed, need I say more?) with the most gorgeous exclusive items such as accessories, basket balls and even yoga mats.

I was also met by an array of belted pouches and got myself the #FreeRockstudSpike white one which is to die for. I usually place these babies over my shoulder when I’m wearing a dress and around my waist when wearing low-waisted pants.

If you’re in Tokyo, do NOT miss to check out the pop-up at the QC CUBE, 4-21-8 Jingumae Shibuya-ku.



Wow! Beautiful!

http://www.evdaily.blogspot.com





One might expect floral patterns and colorful palettes from Resort collections, often shown in exotic places; more commercially conscious separates and accessories tend to dominate the line-ups.

As Pierpaolo Piccioli does, he marched to the beat of his own drum and showed a collection that was as fresh as it was modern – free of clichés and full of brilliant new ideas that unfailingly tread the line between romantic and cool.

The color blocking was irresistible, and my personal favorite was the long-sleeved, midi-dress in red and pink. I don’t usually wear pink but when I do…


great pictures

So cool!My friends and I have just started a blog and we would love if you check it out. It’s all about travels and our passion to travel.
http://teens-wanderlust.blogspot.com.es/
We hope you liked it and don’t forget to spread some love by following us or commenting in our recent posts!

I like the denim dungarees





I am in love with these light-weight body oils from Chanel that leave your body feeling supple and soft and give a beautiful healthy glow. They come in four different amazing scents depending on which mood you're in but they are all a part of the chance experience.

What does one wear to a Valentino Couture show? Valentino of course! I picked this little S/S18 number that matches the majestic decor of the Hôtel Salomon de Rothschild where the show was held. It's sweet as candy and chic as only Valentino can be.

A lip and cheek tint is THE travel essential. When you don't feel like wearing a full face of make-up, you can lightly put it on for a healthy pop of colour anywhere on your face. It’s also waterproof making sure you look cute outside as well as in the water. PS! Paired with a glamorous choker from Isabel Marant.





Beautiful! 

http://www.evdaily.blogspot.com





Rouched corset top by Ellery

Haider Ackermann chic leather turtleneck

Oscar De La Renta pink high-waisted trousers

Y Project cozy leopard coat

Oscar De La Renta velvet cocktail dress

Saint Laurent leather sandal heels

Tibi gorgeous drape sleeve dress

Alessandra Rich bow detail blouse

Vetements biker leather pants



Love this!

http://www.evdaily.blogspot.com





Galliano strikes a chic balance between the dramatic and wearable – and the result is fun to watch and incredible to wear.



LOVED IT!
parinazshahmoradi.com

It looks so good, I love those masterpieces ^^ 

https://ellecitychocolate.blogspot.cz/

Beautiful!

http://www.evdaily.blogspot.com

Rockstud Untitled double-breasted Trench coat

  Rockstud Untitled Clutch

  Rockstud Untitled Sneaker 

Photography Haris Farsarakis

Creative direction & styling Evangelie Smyrniotaki

For boys and for girls, actually for everyone who appreciates the contemporary beauty, Maria Grazia Chiuri and Pierpaolo Piccioli did it again (without oops) created the perfect, imperfection, the project name Untitled. Inspired by the Japanese technique of the kintsugi, that consists in repairing broken ceramic objects with gold powder Maria Grazia and Pierpaolo developed a capsule collection of twelve essentials of our wardrobe, from the beige trench to the jeans and the white sneakers only this time the binding component are the studs. Yes you’ve heard it well, instead of the familiar to all of us stitching, a part of each item has been detached and adjusted using golden studs.

When the time came to brainstorm about the concept of this editorial, I’ve been so moved by the deep meaning of this collection and I’ve been continuously keep telling to myself that I had to find an element that connects everything. My story with Rockstud Untitled’s story, a living thread…. Water. That was it. Yes water is inherently a substance that connects everything to everything else and it was just in front of my eyes when in Paris. The clumsy me during the last fashion week I almost drowned myself in this fountain after I stepped on my floor-length dress. Kidding-not, the danger belongs to the past, the future is bright and alongside with Valentino, even brighter.

Enjoy.

So cool!

Such a gorgeous coat!
Love,
http://www.thestyleventure.com

precious!

xo
http://www.cherry-mag.com

Love the studded trench and clutch and the sneakers are really cool too!
xx
Claudia
http://www.trendenciesblog.com

Looking majestic!!! Your trench is so unique!

http://lartoffashion.com





 

 



Amazing! Absolutely love it!

https://www.antorini.com

Especially love the beige floral coat. So beautiful and timeless! http://www.feller.clothing

Valentino  is about luxury, style and taste. I have loved the consistency of the Valentino brand forever. What no red 🌹
Jandrew
Dress The Part
http://www.jandrewspeaks.com
.

Valentino can do no wrong, Pierpaolo Piccioli is a great fit for the brand

http://www.aryachic.com/spring-fashion

Valentino can do no wrong, Pierpaolo Piccioli is a great fit for the brand

http://www.aryachic.com/spring-fashion

Amazing pictures! Love the colours ❤️
https://styleflames.wordpress.com





I loved the volume and lack thereof in this collection – some body parts are exposed and some drown in massive ruffles and tulles. I found it to be provocative in an unexpected way, but expectedly the shoes were on fire as usual. Vaccarrello is a master of seduction and showmanship.



Evangelie this is such a beautiful review! I am an up coming Greek fashion blogger and you are what I aspire to become and achieve in this industry. If you could take some time and check out my blog http://www.portraitdelamode.com or Instagram (@portraitdelamode) it would be such an honor. I do reviews too! I love you so much 😘😘 Keep up the amazing work you do! It would be an honor to collaborate with you in any way. 

Loveley ❤️️

Absolutely amazing!

http://www.evdaily.blogspot.com





Protagonist Top 

Magda Butrym Hoops 

Isa Arfen Shirt 

Marysia Bikini 

Mansur Gavriel Slides

Saint Laurent Dress

Amazing!

http://www.evdaily.blogspot.com

That Saint Laurent dress! Beautiful pictures.
http://www.parinazshahmoradi.com

Perfect pics!

http://www.evdaily.blogspot.com





Perfect look!

Absolutely the perfect look for this kind of dates!

xx
Antonia via https://www.on-twos-own.com

These colors look great on you! Be bolder, use more color!! I love the floral details on each picture, the whole article looks like a portfolio well made.
xo
Idil of Idillic Fashion

Such a lovely place <3

http://www.evdaily.blogspot.com

Such a beautiful spot in the idyllic English countryside and beautiful in this burgundy floral print. 

http://livinginclips.com/





Hi Evangelie,

My name is Anuj Agarwal. I’m Founder of Feedspot.

I would like to personally congratulate you as your blog STYLE HEROINE  has been selected by our panelist as one of the Top 25 Fashion Photography Blogs on the web.

http://blog.feedspot.com/fashion_photography_blogs/

I personally give you a high-five and want to thank you for your contribution to this world. This is the most comprehensive list of Top 25 Fashion Photography Blogs on the internet and I’m honored to have you as part of this!

Also, you have the honor of displaying the badge on your blog. 

Best,
Anuj

A perfect look. Red and white are a good match.
http://www.parinazshahmoradi.com

Red💋May be the answer to any fashion question . Valentino red .
  Crimson red. Ruby red. Blood red .
Love ❤️
Jandrew
Dress The Part
http://www.jandrewspeaks.com

Love red and white, it’s a perfect combo!

Perfect look!

http://www.evdaily.blogspot.com





Evangelie has also produced and is the face of the latest three global campaigns for By Malene Birger and for the second year she has been named as one of the faces for Jimmy Choo’s digital campaign. From working with internationally renowned luxury brands she has become a regular at fashion week and was invited to take part in the exclusive showings of the Valentino Mirabilia Romae and the Fendi 90th anniversary haute couture collections in Rome. Evangelie has been featured in several international magazines including cover stories and recently received the prestigious Bloglovin award for Best Photography Blog. Evangelie has designed her capsule collection “Heroine by Tom Wood”, produced by the Norwegian brand Tom Wood which subsequently sold out globally.

All photography featured is exclusively produced by Style Heroine creative studio.

Creative & fashion director| Evangelie Smyrniotaki

Photography director| Haris Farsarakis

 

General enquiries email: contact@styleheroine.com

Recent editorial and campaign collaborations on Style Heroine

Website design: hellopanos

Website development: double dot


Off-shoulder blazer by Gabriela Hearst 

Over sized army jacket by Walk Of Shame 

Satin Dress by Khaite

Perfect red lipstick by La Bouche Rouge

Gold Earrings by Celine

Obsessed <3

http://www.evdaily.blogspot.com





From the breathtaking beauty of Jardin Majorelle to the exhilarating chaos of the souks – Marrakesh delivers an array of unforgettable experiences.



where are your sunnies from lovely?? thanks much xoxo

Wanda Nylon.xx

Absolutely love it!

https://www.antorini.com

Such a beautiful post and photos! Absolutely love it!

http://www.evdaily.blogspot.com





 



Love this post!

http://www.evdaily.blogspot.com


Kickstarting a month full of shows with the most spectacular, brilliant one, that history has written yet.
Yes I’m well aware of the aforementioned words because in all honesty guys, it will be quite hard for anyone to overcome Mirabilia Romae‘s epic proportions.
On a personal level, since 2011 that I’ve started blogging, there are times (a lot) that it really feels like living in a dream but cross my heart, nothing and I mean NOTHING had prepared me ever for this, the goosebumps, the emotion and the thrill of watching Maria Grazia Chiuri and Pierpaolo Piccioli’s Haute Couture astonishing creations marching at Piazza Mignanelli.
So wanna take a ride with me? Get in our golf cart. Yes, this was the exact vehicle that took us around to the ten different Mirabilia Romae’s spots, where Valentino’s creations were placed in these “secret” yet magical locations right in the heart of the city’s historical part. The thing about the past is that we often don’t realize how much affects our future until it’s zoomed in front of us. And that’s exactly what Maria Grazia and Pierpaolo wanted to show with Valentino‘s pieces displayed in the parts of Rome that inspired their existence. It was incredible going through them all, a trip to the past that everything made much more sense. And my personal favourite…the depicted Casanatense Library with the astonishing Cyclopean globes and an army of line-up dolls in the middle of the room , a treasure-trove of embroidered ensembles triumphantly standing in the palatial silence.

After the historic delight I had to return fast to my hotel and get ready for the show. My dress, the most beautiful dress I’ve ever worn was already in the room, hung in its bag. I unzipped slowly the bag spending a couple of minutes just staring at it. It was so delicate but simultaneously much heavy by its own craftmanship. Thousand of perfectly placed stones, embellished all-over it to tell its story, “a summer night under the Roman trees”, maybe?
As for the show itself, allow me to say, that Maria Grazia Chiuri and Pierpaolo Piccioli’s touch gave a life force to the Spanish Steps. A stitch in time.The collection was remarkable, balancing gracefully between past, present and future. A tribute to Rome’s legacy and a not-so-silent message for all of us:
THERE ARE TIMES THAT YOU MUST LOOK BACK TO GO FORWARD.

I feel so much gratitude for experiencing Mirabilia Romae and I will never, ever forget that I’ve watched Emperor return to his very own Rome.

This must have been one of those jaw dropping shows, not only the gorgeous collection, but also the back drops to it all. Thanks for giving us a glimpse of the beauty.
Hugs Adele xoxo

Damn Valentino!!! These are epicly stunning!!! <3

http://www.thefacelessstyle.blogspot.com

You were so incredibly lucky to witness such an incredible moment ! Love the pictures, and your dress is out of this world !!

http://www.pardonmyobsession.com/





One-shoulder swimwear by Eres|
 Halterneck swimwear by Eres|
 Visors from a local store in Mykonos
 Photography Haris Farsarakis

Lately in Mykonos my life is totally under these visors. You have to admit it though, the convertibles of the hats might easily give you a sunstroke however they are the chicest way to watch the funky islanders. Eyes (almost) wide shut and behavioral observation. Oh and some Rose… a whispering one for my friends in LA that already miss so much. You probably don’t understand a thing…or you do? 



very nice photos

http://www.theotherwayof.com





The magic rests in the textiles of the pieces and subtle details, such as the satin ropes that held together the silk gowns. The collection was sublime – take my word for it.



Absolutely amazing!

http://www.evdaily.blogspot.com





 

Chloe shirt

Isabel Marant denim

From my recent collaboration with style.com

Love this clean look.  Details on the sunglasses?

Looks great

I just adore this minimal look– so elegant and modern!
xoxo

http://theindiegirl.com/indiegirlblog/chic-flag/floral-dress-and-metallic-clutch

Just perfect!

http://www.evdaily.blogspot.com

Inspiring, strong vision!





The deconstructed pieces oozed legacy however it all came together in a very Galliano way that left an aftertaste of glamour and excellence. I think it’s a easier to slip into banality and recycled ideas when the brand’s legacy is as strong as Maison Margiela’s, however thanks to Galliano’s endless and uncompromising creativity – nothing is ever banal about his shows. Instead of living in a legacy, Galliano is continuing it the only way he can, which is the greatest homage of them all.
Dress Anthony Vaccarello(via Tserkov)

Photography Haris Farsarakis

Well current state of mind is also current state of body. VERY rare for me, we are honest on this space, remember? At this moment I’m lying on a bed at Maldives, next to hubby(who seems annoyed by the clicking noise), surrounded by an airy white tulle canopy. The canopy is always stuffed into our bed linen, a practice I guess for our own safety as the island’s ecosystem is massive.  If you don’t already know it, one of my biggest fears is to find a snake below my pillow… Nuts or not I’m still checking below it every single day. Anyway…This Maldivian island is a paradise. A leaving dream. And the resort here is just beyond. I promise will tell all it in a couple of days.

For now…I’m just enjoying it.

 

This picture is awesome. I love your site, really nice to read
Dress Ports 1961| Bag Muzungu Sisters (both via Tserkov Stores)|
 Sandals Hermes

Photography Haris Farsarakis

You can salute summer on various ways on the first day of September. Some will say goodbye by taking one last dip in the sea while others will try to forget the end of the season by eating a whole tube of ice cream. I, on the other hand, don’t want to forget, I want to remember, the good times and the better ones that are yet to come. Being optimistic much? One may ask what’s better than a breezy summer night? Anywhere that love can flourish I would say…Coming back from Maldives, a place that gives you the time to find yourself again, the one that you’ve had neglected by working so hard for the past year, makes you see things quite differently. What I mean about differently? Well It’s good, almost precious, to take a step back , don’t go with the flow and enjoy what you’ve accomplished so far. Trying for more might come to a dead-end and striving for excellence might be an utopia. All that matters is feelings and if these airy fringes brought you back for a second to an island’s distant shores, then on this space there will be always summer.

such  a cute dress!

http://bit.ly/2gIDhIc

very beautiful dresses , it looks chic and great
http://www.modeonly.com

nice color tone <3

Love the fringing on that dress, makes it such an original piece!
https://www.jolicloset.com/en

fantastic

This dress is dreamy ! Love it with the slides x

http://www.pardonmyobsession.com/

I also decided to just look back at summer and be happy about all the beautiful moments that it brought! I just got back from one more beach vacay, but until the next one! You look gorgeous in this dress, the tassels are so cool! 

x
Shloka
thesilksneaker.com





Thailand is one of my favourite countries to visit during the summer, even though there’s a chance for a bit of rain during this time of the year. I love the serenity and peace that one finds near the water, and the beautiful sounds of nature in the forest. Since it can get hot, humid and wet all at the same time, it’s not an easy destination to pack for. My tip is to go for white linen pants and wide white shirts, that can keep you cool and covered at the same time. I like to break the monochrome look with colourful earrings, such as the ones from Oscar della Renta. Other things I wore during this trip are: 

Straw bag by Rosie Assoulin,

Black and orange swimming suit by Eres, 

White dress by Solace London, 

White top by Zimmermann, and Prefall Celine pants. 

Creative direction and photography : Evangelie Smyrniotaki



Amazing pictures! You look so good 🙂

xx
Antonia via https://www.on-twos-own.com

Stunning location and photos!! 

Love <3
Kay | Style Unsettled
http://www.styleunsettled.com

Dreamy <3

http://www.evdaily.blogspot.com





On-theme, many of the tweed jackets and dresses were covered in clear hoods, ponchos and coats – including gorgeous plastic boots and bags. Plastic is making quite the comeback and will definitely make a splash next season.

This was such a perfect way to finish Paris Fashion Week – talk about saving the best for last!



I was absolutely in love with this Chanel show! The environment and the clothes, absolutely breathtaking.

https://ellecitychocolate.blogspot.cz/2017/10/best-of-paris-fashion-week-runway.html

Absolutely amazing! 

http://www.evdaily.blogspot.com





My go-to brand for style-proof, beautiful separates is Joseph. My love for the British brand is passed down to me from my mother, and now it’s hotter than ever thanks to its never failing coolness.

First look at Salle Privée! It’s a luxury brand for men created by Patrick Munsters and as you guys know I love dipping my foot in the menswear pool - coats especially as they have that impeccable tailoring, cut and oversize feel.

It’s been a dream of mine to go to Tokyo for a very long time, and get to stay at the Andaz Tokyo Hotel made it all the more special. A couple of days isn’t nearly enough to explore the city and thanks to the beautiful view from my room, I could soak up the grandeur of Tokyo and it’s buzzing life from the comfort of my bed. The most notable things however was the impeccable service and delicious food!


Their Spring Summer 2018 collection cemented the brand’s American-cool DNA and there was also a hint of romanticism this time around with silk ribbons, florals, ruffles and ruched tulle tube dresses, perhaps affected by couture atmosphere.

Proenza Schouler made a splash in Paris and its ripples are glamorous.



What a beautiful collection. Proenza Schouler never disappoints.
http://www.aryachic.com/to-liberty-and-beyond

Great post and pics!

http://www.evdaily.blogspot.com





I am in love with these light-weight body oils from Chanel that leave your body feeling supple and soft and give a beautiful healthy glow. They come in four different amazing scents depending on which mood you're in but they are all a part of the chance experience.

A lip and cheek tint is THE travel essential. When you don't feel like wearing a full face of make-up, you can lightly put it on for a healthy pop of colour anywhere on your face. It’s also waterproof making sure you look cute outside as well as in the water. PS! Paired with a glamorous choker from Isabel Marant.

I'm in love with the way that this adorable Louis Vuitton Perfume set looks and what's more perfect than a perfume for every mood? These little beauties range from light, floral scents to deeper smokier ones for colder times. This also happens to be the most perfect gift for the indecisive soul, am I right?

La creme main is my knight in shining armour during the cold winter times. Especially with its practical and cute packaging, you can moisturise everywhere and it fits in any bag. Having soft hands is key, and never to be neglected boys and girls!

For the summer I’m taking cue from Delpozo’s S/S18 show and I’m going for the rosy, natural make-up, slick hair and a big statement head piece in everybody’s favourite material - straw! Is it summer yet?




Valentino bomber(via LuisaWorld)/Rag & Bone denim/ Saint Laurent boots/ Alexander McQueen ring.

Photography Haris Farsarakis

Battle of ages. HOW-TO survive a case of a severe blizzard situation without looking like the otherwise lovable hippopotamus that searches for love food at a distant lakeshore.

Well on this space, we are the fiercest ones, and we’ll go with the bomber and layer it. We might end-up looking like an onion but never like the happy hippo.

So when I’ve been asked by the dearest Farfetch to select my favorite items from Luisa World for the upcoming season, there could be no-other than the coolest Valentino bomber with the even cooler gang on its back, on the top of my list. It’s awesome no? I’ve been eyeing on this since the very moment I saw it on vogue’s pages three months ago and now tadaaaa in store, a proof that times goes by so quickly! I guess in no-time there will be summer again..Drink some Margaritas by a string of blue lights
Listen to the Mariachi play at midnight
Are you with me, are you with me?

I’m so with you on this piece Evangelie, it’s stunning & looks gorgeous on you. Really pleased bombers are back on trend.
Hugs Adele xoxo

grat photos!

xx
http://cherry-mag.com

love those boots – they are amazing!
xx. Mirjam
http://www.jeneregretterien.ch

Oh God, that Valentino bomber… Swoon, so gorgeous !!

http://www.pardonmyobsession.com/

Superb bomber jacket, a must have item for the upcoming Spring!

http://lartoffashion.com

Wow I love it! Very beautiful.

http://www.leftbanked.com





Shoes Nike Vapormax

Sweatshirt Burberry

Denim Vetements

Super nice shoes.
Love your style and your web!.
outstanding glasses also. Wicked!!!

Cheers from spain

We Loved All Your Curated Items!  🖤 Check Out herlayers.com and Let Us Know What You Think.

I love your outfit here!
http://www.beautyfineprint.com/

Loved this!

XX

Love, http://herrendezvous.com/

Omg these sneakers are awesome. Jelly shoes are def coming back, so these shoes are perfect for this year. 

http://www.aryachic.com/hiking-athleisure-wear

Beautiful 🖤 . Please where are your glasses from? Xox♥️

Love your style so much! 

https://razorscalestyle.wordpress.com

Pretty cool kicks!

https://blog.elaineturner.com/





“Concrete jungle where dreams are made of
There’s nothing you can’t do
Now you’re in New York
These streets will make you feel brand new
Big lights will inspire you
Hear it from New York, New York, New York”

Good morning from the frozen yet glorious Big Apple for Pierpaolo Piccioli’s first Pre Fall collection for Valentino. It’s the first Pre Fall collection that it will also have a catwalk  show and no need to tell how excited I am to see what amazingness he holds for us.

Go PP, go Valentino.

Love this collection! Looking forward to the flower prints and embroidery/applique on the streets.
http://www.styleme.green

I also wrote an editorial on this, as well as one on their former creative director – Maria Grazia Chiuri – who is now at Dior. Both collections were fabulous

http://www.aryachic.com/christian-dior-pre-fall-2017-review

This collection is phenomenal, I see the consistent repetition of florals throughout the collection, can’t wait for florals to be a major trend in 2017. Love your blog heaps, I was wondering if maybe you could help me out and answer a few questions, related to fashion blogging?
Thank you,

OMG! so cool. I love everything Valentino!
https://closettostreet.wordpress.com/Exclusively on styleheroine.com you can see so close Fendi’s  newest Fall-Winter collection that you can almost feel it.  So far my very favourite show from Milan’s fashion week, with powerful prints, artisanal excellence, futuristic shapes and the hottest reds ever. Enjoy!

 

 

 



The red boots are a dream. Just wonderful. Very beautiful FENDI photos. Thanks for that.

Love
Tamara http://www.schuhxl.de

FENDI is a sophisticated brand , who carefully control their image . FENDI  is luxury! I love the reds !
Jandrew
jandrewspeaks@gmail.com
http://jandrewspeaks.com

I think Fendi is very successful at relating nostalgia from the past into pieces for the now. Loved this collection.
http://www.the-redhand.comI am in love with these light-weight body oils from Chanel that leave your body feeling supple and soft and give a beautiful healthy glow. They come in four different amazing scents depending on which mood you're in but they are all a part of the chance experience.

What does one wear to a Valentino Couture show? Valentino of course! I picked this little S/S18 number that matches the majestic decor of the Hôtel Salomon de Rothschild where the show was held. It's sweet as candy and chic as only Valentino can be.

A lip and cheek tint is THE travel essential. When you don't feel like wearing a full face of make-up, you can lightly put it on for a healthy pop of colour anywhere on your face. It’s also waterproof making sure you look cute outside as well as in the water. PS! Paired with a glamorous choker from Isabel Marant.




Ronald Van Der Kemp shirt|
 3×1 denim|
 Celine shoes
 Photography Haris Farsarakis

This season we will celebrate “the longest the better” -the innocent way. How much do I really want to add some naughty emojis over here, however the serious notion of this blog puts an X to any scandalous thoughts.
 So if you didn’t get it already I am talking about long, long draped ties. Ties, longer than the average that add bit rhythmic-national-team drama to your hands however at the moment you will bend over to rub your dog’s ears you can easily trip on them saluting the floors. What a woman can do for fashion….great fashion tho.

😉😉😉😉

Outfit  is so gorgeous and the photographer is very professional cause your photos is so clear

Will surely try this trend….looks very intersting

http://www.pinkbeetle.in

Your Blog is awesome!!! http://storetip.comCeline dress|
 Balenciaga boots

Photography Haris Farsarakis

A lot has happened in my life since I last logged in styleheroine. Please try to follow me, I went to Miami for a private, beautiful dinner with Matches Fashion, stayed four days there making the most of the beach, met my friends and finally spent some quality time away from the fashion weeks, on my way back home I’ve stayed 14 hours at the airport because the BA plane’s engine couldn’t get fixed, I fell hard off the lounge’s sofa with my plate(and the pasta) dropping onto my head, I nursed my husband as he got super ill, of course I got him well and the last three days I’m shooting the new campaign for By Malene Birger. Yes life is a roller coaster, 2 weeks passing by like 2 minutes and one month like three. For what it’s worth I’m taking you back to Paris in a glimpse of an eye. What was I saying?



Love it!!!

Amazing dress and so stylish outfit! You look great!

RitaLifestyle.com  | Insta: @m_margaritka

These boots are absolutely stunning and a beautiful touch to this dress! 

http://agirlnamedlatisha.blogspot.com

That dress is so stunning, and the perfect color!

http://loveverity.com

Beautiful!! Simple gorgeous dress.

http://www.alinavlad.com

Oh my god. Love it!!!!

http://www.theotherwayof.com

In love with ur dress!!!
x
http://www.puregreenremedies.nl/en

Soooo beautiful! I love your style.

XO, http://www.darlingtrend.com





As my favorite look from show oozes careless sophistication and a hint of romance, I styled it with the hat from look 11 – I love adding a bit of contrast in my looks.

 

Yee-haw!

I never quite understand how you create such movement in your shots while still remaining to look motionless! You’re a true artist and what a perfect collaboration you and Haris are ! 

http://livinginclips.com/

So cool!

http://www.evdaily.blogspot.com





I’ve said this before and I’ll say it again - Gabriela Hearst knows what women want and how they want to feel. This chiffon-trimmed velvet dress has the perfect cut and fit - it emphasises the right parts and shows just enough to make you feel a queen.

I didn’t plan for this but when the stars align, your Eres swimsuit matches the Wes Anderson-inspired beach chairs at the One&Only Resort in Dubai, and voilá - magic happens! Expect nothing less when staying here, as the resort is truly magical and unique.

Underneath thousands of paillettes lies a silk-georgette slip that feels incredibly luxe and smooth, in true Miu Miu spirit. The spaghetti straps and split on the side are pleasant details and make this the ultimate va-va-voom piece.


The association between gowns and haute couture may still be strong but Valentino keeps blurring the line between evening and day wear, proving that that excellence and impeccable craftsmanship is present in whatever Piccioli touches, whether that’s a simple pleated skirt or hooded cape. 



Obsessed <3

http://www.evdaily.blogspot.com

Hi Evangelie,

Valentino has become, no doubt, my favourite designer. He understands sensuality in a very elegant way. 

Lots of love
Nidhi
https://stitchandshizzle.com/

Beautiful collection, indeed.
Leather pants Calvin Klein jeans|
 Top Calvin Klein jeans

Photography Haris Farsarakis

Why finding the surreal fit on leather pants is a mental struggle?…I bet y’all know. Leather pants are not much forgiving. 

You ate cake last night? They are silently judging you. However what I’ve found (and I KNOW  you trust me) is that the classic shapes are the ones who flatter most. And who’s the master of classics? Yes the iconic Calvin Klein has revived his leather line with the Rebel Edge Limited Edition collection. The struggle is over guys! I swear they fit so so good! And because some thoughtful styling is always welcomed, the collection has been enriched with the perfect teammates for the leathers, which are no other than the simple cotton tops.  Like? I love!

Enjoy!

love those shoes!

http://bit.ly/2gIDhIc

omg you and leather pants are meant to happen! Love the new site. miss and love you much, magical sister!
xo
V

Aweeee baby girl. Thank you for stopping by. Miss you

Leather pants are awesome for any cool look. Love your post
http://www.fabooshlane.com

“They are silently judging you” <- best line, definitely made me giggle!

Rxx
http://www.peppermintdolly.com

Dope pictures! Amazing styling <3

http://www.vesthier.com

Love your shorter hair !

http://www.pardonmyobsession.com/

Wow, love these pictures! and the almost all-black look is simply amazing!
Lucie, xx

http://thefrenchpier.blogspot.com/





 

When I closed my eyes I could almost hear the olive leaves rustling in an August summer breeze at the temple of Poseidon. I could stay there the whole night watching the full moon rising above the bay…

The unexpected moments in fashion that touch your heart, these exact moments that make you feel extremely proud.

Thank you Karl Lagerfeld for still believing (and creating) in the real, timeless beauty right in the age of numbers. And thank you for making me feel like I am at home in the middle of Paris. My home is your home and this is our ideal Greece.

Stunning! Absolutely love it!

https://www.antorini.com

Amazing!

http://www.evdaily.blogspot.comCrushing on crushing the Labor day rule and wearing white pants at the Chanel S/S18 show in Paris! No one does black and white like Karl Lagerfeld, making the classic feel exciting again.

Known firstly for creating it-perfumes, now Byredo-founder Ben Gorham presents his new it-bags. Just like his scents, the Seema handle bags are minimal: simple in shape and surprising in level of comfort. Gorham breaks new ground and strikes gold.


Raey fine knit/Raey skirt/Saint Laurent belt/Celine shoes.

Ph Haris Farsarakis

Monument to Overseas Combatants, of the Colonial Wars, Fortress of Good Success (Forte do Bom Sucesso), Belem, Lisbon.

Kick starting my Portugal tour by saluting a fine British act, an act that apparently made my appearance no less than impressive at the absolutely mesmerizing surroundings of Lisboa. Raey alongside with Portugal have been both the most pleasant surprises during the past week.

Raey is actually the newborn of matchesfashion.com. I guess their many years of experience in the fashion industry have been proved extremely fruitful because guys I swear, on my blogger’s honor, they are killing it. Clean lines combined with the best materials, a somehow hard-to-get match out there. You absolutely have to experience their fine cashmere knits. If you close your eyes and face the sun, they do feel like a spring day in Portofino, a perfect escape, what fashion should be all about…..

Click below to see my top choices from Raey collection.
[show_lookbook_widget id=”197776″]

pure and chic.
http://www.vukasinlifestyle.wordpress.com

G-O-R-G-E-O-U-S photos! 

x Krizia 

Shark Attack – Fashion Blog

So fabulous and how great is that first pic ! Love it ! 

http://www.thefashionpanda.be
http://www.thefashionpanda.be

Your blog is pure art.
http://nessielicious.blogspot.com

The skirt & shoes look AMAZING together. Love the whole concept of the shoot with the guard in the back ground.
Hugs Adele xoxo

I agree matchesfashion.com is great! Portugal would be an amazing trip too.

-M
http://www.violetroots.com

I didn’t know that brand, but wow, how gorgeous you look ! Love the skirt, perfect for Portugal !

http://www.pardonmyobsession.com/





My clan, stayed together for the whole night all clad in our chic yet comfy Thakoon sleepwear, having most probably one of the best nights of my life. A lot of champagne, a lot of laughter and A LOT of gossiping. I have missed them so much….Oh I forgot, let me introduce you properly. Please meet Mara and Lydia. My girls.

 

In partnership with Thakoon.

❤️❤️😍😍 happy birthday 🎁🎈🎂!

Beautiful photoshoot & I love the pajama-chic !
http://www.lemoyl.com

Love this!

http://www.evdaily.blogspot.com

Champagne and PJ’s. What more could a girl want. Love it. 

http://www.gloryofthesnow.com

Too wonderful party editorial
http://www.theladycracy.it

Haha very cute, looks like a fun photoshoot

http://www.aryachic.com/the-wonderful-whitsundays

I love the blue PJs with the red (piping is it called?) !

http://www.eastmonico.com

So fun!! I may have to plan one of these over holiday break.. Thakoon not included, unfortunately.  But yes to the bubbly!
Cheers,

T with Meraki
twithmeraki.com
Photography Haris Farsarakis
 Creative Direction & styling Evangelie Smyrniotaki

All the images belong to By Malene Birger’s Pre-Fall 16  global digital campaign 

Tadaaaaa, your girl, your very best friend from 2011 is the proud face of the newly released digital campaign of By Malene Birger. It’s not my first campaign however this one will be forever treasured in my heart as it’s the first one also produced by us as a creative studio. Yes the depicted images have been shot solely under our Greek sun.  A series of images inspired by By Malene Birger’s calm power. Simple lines, soft light and colors for the woman who radiates confidence and security in her BMB pieces. And that was exactly my direction behind the campaign, true feelings, for true clothes. I hope you like it.

💋💋❤❤❤💪💪

Stunning outfits, love them <3
http://styleacab.in http://stylecabinrunway.com





By Malene Birger Jacket(in salmon)/By Malene Birger Pants(in salmon)(both from W15collection)/Celine bag(similar here)

Ph Fransiska Olivia

Hand’s up who’s up for a ride! Cause If we are gonna build a time machine, that would be definitely in a car(stolen from Back to the Future).

So back to time and altogether we head to North, towards the Vikings ex-territory(obviously I am also obsessed with these series) and the most beautiful Copenhagen. It has been a couple of months ago and the chill season had just started but I could still stroll around the city in my personal favorite outfit from By Malene Birger’s Winter 15 collection. Straight from the catwalk, blending with the grey bricks of the city, By Milene ‘s totally relaxed approach to menswear, came to prove that yes, the Queen of women suits actually exists. And apparently is Danish. All hail the Danish Queen!!



 

Stunning suit! Great combo with a brown bag!

JOURNAL OF STYLE

You wear that suit like nobody’s business ! Absolutely stunning and brilliant as usual !

http://www.pardonmyobsession.com/My Parisian gift to all of you that I believe you’ve devastately missed me. The most anticipated winter collection will go live in just a few hours. With all my love guys, enjoy the new Valentino collection!


Maison Valentino regal as usual! Love it!
Ana
http://www.champagnegirlsabouttown.co.uk
Jumpsuit Rosie Assoulin|
 Bag and shoes Celine
 Photography Haris Farsarakis

If you know me already and if let’s say someone offered me kingdom to be the Queen then this would be no other than the kingdom of jumpsuits. 

i am a jumpsuit love and this one is no exception. i love the texture, color and how nice the pictures are. definitely inspired me to create my blog
fashionisbriante.worldpress.com





 

Céline S/S17 Sunglasses

Céline S/S17 Dress

Céline S/S17 Shirt 

Celine is one my favorite brands. Each piece in this editorial is beautiful and you match them very well.
http://www.parinazshahmoradi.com

Absolutely love it!

http://www.evdaily.blogspot.comFrom Singapore to India, to Paris, to Berlin and now back to Athens. My life has been a whirlwind lately plus a new space that went live almost two months ago. But I just wanted to drop a not-so-short line and say to all of you that it’s still my pen here and everything that I completely adore. From my braincells with love that is but in a new synchronous way, an inspirational magazine, a place that prioritizes the followers and not the clicks or the numbers. Thus on the new styleheroine.com you won’t see a labyrinth of pages and windows. Everything is on the home page, crystal clear and very friendly to your sanity. So I really wanted to drop a hello, to ask you how do you find my new me and that yes editorials will be back on track not because I’ve missed my voice, my high-pitched voice is still here but because I have missed yours. Now shoot me, tell all.

Dress by Isabel Marant

Booties by Celine

Wow this is such a wonderful editorial, all the pictures look so stunning.

http://ohduckydarling.com

I have missed your editorials!  Was wondering why there weren’t more of them. 

http://Www.aryachic.com

gorgeous dress! envious!
x
http://www.puregreenremedies.nl/en





Ganni shirt/Emilio Pucci shorts(via LuisaWorld)

Ph Haris Farsarakis

Still shamelessly Thailanding or for those who are not following my adventures on instagram( by the way, WHY?,perquè,pourquoi) I’m at my beloved palm-tree-land watching my toes getting darker and darker every day. Might be a fetish, but really not because when we have a fetish don’t we really know it? Like the other day a friend of my mine told me that she has just started a relationship with a double Gemini and I really wanted to grab and save her…

GURL!! Why are you doing this to yourself?

Yes I have (maybe) a fetish with horoscopes and I cannot hide it. With my aforementioned almost bad habit comes also the equally bad tendency to judge people by the dates they are born. I mean how many times have you lived the Cancer-woman drama or the stubbornness of an Aries?Bad-bid with a Virgo? Fall in love with the Aquarius’ mega-mind? Join the club.

And if you ask for my very own species I’m a fish, a Pisces, with ascendant in Leo, born just before the Aries clan begins so much of the aforementioned stubbornness characterises also me. In other news our beloved Susan Miller says that today is the luckiest day of the year! Shall we believe her? Let’s see…

 

I am absolutely in love with this shorts! 

minonimia.blogspot.com

Shit, SAME HERE. I’m so judgemental when it comes to zodiac signs.. I had a Gemini friend so I know literally everything about double faces and dual personalities. The stubbornness of an Aries? Been there, done that, got the t-shirt (but still wear it, so..). Also I’m always like “Dude, I’m an Aquarius, so that automatically makes me smarter than you” (kidding). But seriously, I’m a bit nervous when my horoscope says “Do not travel today” or even worse “Do not get in the car”…
I’m in love with the shorts, but really, where am I in this constellation, where’s the Aquarius?! 😉
You look stunning as always!

I’m a Scorpio!
Those shorts are amazing.

x Krizia 

Shark Attack – Fashion Blog

Such beautiful shorts!!! Talking about horoscopes I think that they often reflect  people’s  paricular features 🙂 As a born Aquarius I feel flattered about my “mega-mind” ;)) Enjoy Thailand!

http://www.mymoodmyday.com





Proenza Schouler top/ Vetements jeans/ Gucci loafers
 The shoot took place at The Landmark Mandarin Oriental Hong Kong
 Photography: Sun Sun Leung

Creative direction: Evangelie Smyrniotaki

I come back in a full, sincere, apologetic mode because this time it’s been almost two weeks since my last shout out. It’s not only that I’ve been on vacation but it’s mostly that styleheroine.com is growing fast and I’m just one human being handling everything by my own. So it’s finally time to admit that I need urgently an assistant and maybe the new year’s resolution should be to find one. Go ahead fellas, spread the news and most importantly email me. And maybe, who knows, we’ll be together in the future.  Sounds romantic yet…it’s not!  

Let’s go back to the Oriental side of life and the mesmerizing Hong Kong which unfortunately I have to salute today, one of the cities that honestly I could  stay for the rest of my life. I’ve had this discussion with a friend there and I’ve asked her why do some residents keep complaining about living in such a beautiful city. Her answer was probably the most obvious one, that massive cities like Hong Kong demand never-ending working hours and people don’t have the time to enjoy the beauty of their surroundings. True words yet allow me to say that there’s always time to appreciate beauty. Don’t ever think that things are given and cannot change. Everything can change anytime so take five minutes and enjoy the sparkling sky line of this astonishing city, a glorious proof of what human minds can achieve.

On another-style note if there was one piece that could fit any body type that would certainly be the off-shoulder. I love that comes back in fashion a design almost from medieval ages. Wow, it would be such a scandal to show some shoulder those  days.  Nowadays naaaaah. Neither nudity is scandalous anymore. Of-shoulders are clean, broaden shoulders and elongate the neck almost a magic wand in your hands.  You need this wand no? I certainly do.

Amazing pictures, love it! x
graciousghost.blogspot.com

I adore the texture of the top & the back detail is exquisite.
Hugs Adele xoxo

You look gorgeous!
Loving the top.

x Krizia 

Shark Attack – Fashion Blog

I love these picks and the artistry in them.

Love,
http://www.thestyleventure.com

Nice pics, love the proenza top !
http://www.cherry-mag.com/

wow that top is insanely gorgeous
love it
xx
http://anoddgirl.blogspot.com.au

How gorgeous ! I love your Proenza look, so refined like you !

http://www.pardonmyobsession.com/





Denim Rodarte(here and here)/Jacket Rodarte(also check out this beauty)/Loafers Christopher Kane. All via CURVE NY
Bag Saint Laurent

PH Jeff Thibodeau

From hair to waist, all sky-high everything…

My hair does suffer from some kind of mysterious blonding curse which graciously gifted my scalp with a few new pairs of well-groomed cockroach’s antennae to sense NY’s high-vibes. YES, I won’t lie, my hair has been broken. Almost platinum’s side effects have eventually showed up. When it comes to hair though nothing is irreversible or non fixable as long as I keep in mind my mom’s biggest beauty secret that is no other than pure olive oil. DON’T EAT IT, at least don’t do it before applying it directly to your hair, leave for an hour or so and then clean it away only with shampoo at the beginning  and then rinse it with water. Before ditching the idea of smelling like a Greek salad, just remember that it really works. Moms know better, been there, said that…

In another news my seasonal search for the highest waisted pants has happily-ever-after ended in NY by finding DAT awesomeness. By DAT I mean the depicted Rodarte. They are the highest of all, the Burj Khalifa of the pants and before you rush to judge me, yes that’s good. The highest the waistline rests above your hips, the tallest you’ll look. That simple. Just remember…size up on these jeans. They are so, so tight and on this blog…well, we don’t want you to suffer….



New York really agrees with you, you look so chic ! Love the flats and jacket, and olive oil did wonder to your hair !
http://www.pardonmyobsession.com/

I am getting more and more into high waisted jeans. It’s true, it makes you look taller, sitting just below the waistline is perfect! and they are so comfortable! I love the outfit.;-). You used to be a brunette and now you are a blondie, either way, when  ones hair is damaged, olive oil is the  ultimate solution to restore its shine and health! mommas around the world and styleheroine, thanks for the tip !!
http://fashionaltitude.com/

Great pieces, love the looks!!

XX,
BAANOU

http://WWW.BAANOU.COM
#ShopBaanou





I am in love with these light-weight body oils from Chanel that leave your body feeling supple and soft and give a beautiful healthy glow. They come in four different amazing scents depending on which mood you're in but they are all a part of the chance experience.

What does one wear to a Valentino Couture show? Valentino of course! I picked this little S/S18 number that matches the majestic decor of the Hôtel Salomon de Rothschild where the show was held. It's sweet as candy and chic as only Valentino can be.

A lip and cheek tint is THE travel essential. When you don't feel like wearing a full face of make-up, you can lightly put it on for a healthy pop of colour anywhere on your face. It’s also waterproof making sure you look cute outside as well as in the water. PS! Paired with a glamorous choker from Isabel Marant.



Leotard Valentino|
 Dress Valentino|
 Boots Valentino

Photography Haris Farsarakis

Winter warm up and a trend to watch. 2 in 1 for a Monday that I try to remember when was the last time that I wore real clothes. Yes I am still barefooted in Maldives, wearing nothing than my swimwear. We even go sans shoes to diner, a habit that I am afraid might cost me one week of my life, trying to figure out how I am gonna fit my toes into shoes. So this post is something like a missing note to the gloomy dressed-up Parisian days and the trends that are yet to come.

Nice looking outfit..

https://www.varunajithesh.com/

leotards are a girls best friend
racinespa.com

Love this layered look and the contrast of the chunky boots.

Vikki, xx
http://www.styleandminimalism.com

I love your pictures and this look is gorgeous! 🙂
http://www.yo-odd.com/

That’s what I call Winterized Summer fashion! The pleated airy dress makes you look like a ethereal beauty, leotard underlines your ideal body and sweet shoulders… and boots are saying like: Hey, I am not that simple! 🙂 Love it!
http://stylediscussions.com/





I am in love with these light-weight body oils from Chanel that leave your body feeling supple and soft and give a beautiful healthy glow. They come in four different amazing scents depending on which mood you're in but they are all a part of the chance experience.

What does one wear to a Valentino Couture show? Valentino of course! I picked this little S/S18 number that matches the majestic decor of the Hôtel Salomon de Rothschild where the show was held. It's sweet as candy and chic as only Valentino can be.

A lip and cheek tint is THE travel essential. When you don't feel like wearing a full face of make-up, you can lightly put it on for a healthy pop of colour anywhere on your face. It’s also waterproof making sure you look cute outside as well as in the water. PS! Paired with a glamorous choker from Isabel Marant.


As someone always in denial of colder times, I decided to pull out my Balenciaga F/W17 pants in the summeriest color I could get my hands on. I also love that they have side stripes that elongate my legs and add a bit of a sporty element to my look. Style them with a pair of pumps and pointy-toed boots!

I’m a sucker for playful proportions, all things red and cuddly sweaters - so yeah, it’s safe to say that this oversized Balenciaga turtleneck ticks all boxes and becomes this week’s Crush!

Ever wondered who my all-time favourite designer is? Check out my candid Q&A with Farfetch where I give tips on off-duty styles, reveal wardrobe secrets and my best buys.




Dress Gucci
Photography Haris Farsarakis

Sweet tooth and ruffled details, I’d say it’s the best hangover cure, you’ll say I’m nuts!
Back from NY with a suitcase full of happiness, if happiness could fit in a rectangular box. Styleheroine.com has been awarded as the best photography blog in the world and I’m still with head in the clouds. Breath in breath out and a second post is coming up, a thankful note for giving me so much joy….

love that blouse!

http://bit.ly/2gIDhIc

Love love love this dress! I’d even play around with different belts if the current one is removable

http://www.aryachic.com

Stunning!
http://www.evdaily.blogspot.com

So gorgeous, I love Gucci !

http://www.pardonmyobsession.com/

Such a lovely look!
https://www.jolicloset.com/en

gorgeous dress <3

https://andreaandcoco.wordpress.com/ 

Pants Balenciaga|
 Boots Balenciaga

Photography Haris Farsarakis

If there’s only one thing to buy for this fall then these boots will definitely mirror your face everytime you stare at the floors. Obsessed or not, I AM, with Demna Gvasalia’s new perspective, I’m sure there’s no way not to love these pretty badass yet so walkable booties. Saved and glammed up, party feet in action.

Gorgeous! and also interesting look

http://tiny.cc/9rgely

These are stunning babe, love the gold & grey match <3

Those boots are definitely made for walking ! Love the pants as well, so chic !

http://www.pardonmyobsession.com/

Love this outfit!

http://www.laphosphenes.com/

It’s so refreshing to seeing a bold boot paired with something other than black pants! Works so well. 

xx

http://rulesbyrachael.com

Love this post,
http://www.cosmopolly.com/

Your beautiful style is always inspiring me to try new things, these boots are perfect!
Glamoury Armory Blog





I am in love with these light-weight body oils from Chanel that leave your body feeling supple and soft and give a beautiful healthy glow. They come in four different amazing scents depending on which mood you're in but they are all a part of the chance experience.

What does one wear to a Valentino Couture show? Valentino of course! I picked this little S/S18 number that matches the majestic decor of the Hôtel Salomon de Rothschild where the show was held. It's sweet as candy and chic as only Valentino can be.

A lip and cheek tint is THE travel essential. When you don't feel like wearing a full face of make-up, you can lightly put it on for a healthy pop of colour anywhere on your face. It’s also waterproof making sure you look cute outside as well as in the water. PS! Paired with a glamorous choker from Isabel Marant.


As someone who has hyperpigmentation, I have to be really careful under the sun - especially in the tropics. I obsess with creams, sunblock and hats, and now I found a product that has been the most efficient to date. Chanel’s  SUBLIMAGE La Protection UV SPF 50 is both potent and delicate, which takes the best care of your skin so you can be carefree during your time off!

I usually have super chapped lips so a little trick of mine is to apply a bit of lip balm before the lipstick. However, even since my lips have gotten acquainted with Coco Rouge, they have never felt more hydrated! This new lipstick by Chanel is both nurturing and packed with gorgeous pigment, my favourite being number 444 Gabrielle. Juicy cherry lips all Summer baby!

The Chanel Fall 17 Haute Couture show left me not only with memories from a beautiful collection, it also left behind a marvellous scent - the new Gabrielle Chanel perfume. With tones of orange blossom, jasmine, yilan yilang, tuberose and white flowers, it smells fresh and modern. If elegance were a fragrance it would be the new Gabrielle Chanel, and her words do still echo and inspire the Maison’s creations, "Elegance comes from being as beautiful inside and outside.”.

Give your nails the best summer treatment and go for Chanel's 562 Coralium polish. I'm wearing it non-stop, it's a fab shade and an even more fab mood-fixer. xx

The highlighter I’m obsessing over right now  - the Illuminator adds radiance and a beautiful shimmer to your face. Just dab a little of the product on the highest point of your cheeks for some extra luminosity and you’re ready to face the warmer season.


 

Anine Bing knit/ inside t-shirt Acne/ skirt Acne(not similar at all but I think you’ll get my point)/boots Chanel/Earring Louis Vuitton/bag Smythson.

Ph Alex F.

Back and fourth like a ping-pong ball we go on this blog. But some of us we find it kinda amusing, exactly like the aforementioned game. So here I am again, virtually this time, strolling around the city of future. I don’t really mind the humidity, it actually opens up my pores and detoxifies my skin or the 70000 Singapore Dollars needed to obtain the licence to drive your car for ten years(yes you’ve heard well). I WANT Singapore to adopt me! Please do! I’ll be a good girl. I might start wearing some pink if you’ll ask it. As long I can wake up to this views every single day. Singapore is in my heart and every time I come back it’s always different. Better in a way. This city celebrates the miracles that humanity can make. And we really can. Just look around take a deep breath and think tha everything is possible…

Love the all black eeerthang!

http://www.bluelabelsboutique.com

Cool and relaxed look. Love it!!!

Love it ! 

http://www.thefashionpanda.be
http://www.thefashionpanda.be

that skirt and those boots are so cool!

http://www.lecitygypsy.com/

Love the all black look!

http://www.FashionSnag.com

You are truly so gorgeous, always nailing it with ALL your outfits ! The boots and skirt are superb, and I love your Vuitton earring !!

http://www.pardonmyobsession.com/





 

Ph Jordan Makarof

We do love great clothes, after all that’s why we’re all here. But if clothes could speak in common language, they’d tell you that they do unconditionally love a fit-body and even more a fit-mind.

My newest collaboration with Net-A-Porter was a challenge for me. A challenge to wake-up my body. Net-A-Sporter just on time for the fashion weeks has  launched the 7-day body reboot program, per me an absolutely genius program to feel strong like a heroine again.. You know a couple of weeks ago I was vacationing on the best spot on earth to be uber lazy. So I’ve returned kinda…disoriented…unfocused…jelly bean for god’s sake.

Net-a-porter’s 7 day body reboot was my rehabilitation.  A smart, no-time-consuming training and dietary program that made me feel awake again all of my forgotten muscles. Strength, mobility, intensity and restoration workouts coordinated with the most delicious-healthy menu. It was not easy…the first two days I was fantasizing myself walking down Jardin des Tuileries wearing hot-pants to stay focused. Yet trust me this program is genius and your body will eventually remember and master all the moves.

Now do tell me…I got my lines back, No?

Your exclusive guaranteed beautifying schedule is live now on Net-A-Sporter.

You can get my fitness uniform below:

[show_shopthepost_widget id=”251146″]

The trainers are amazing, and you have definitely inspired me to work out more often!! You look great! 

http://www.lashoegirl.com

Wow! You have an amazing body Evangelie! Do you work out a lot? Love the top & those trainers are fab! Love how they tie round the ankle. Another great collaboration!
Hugs xoxo
http://www.intotheblonde.com/

Wow thank you Adele! No i dont train alot. Lately i do the betasporter’s program plus walking!
xo





Celine dress(via LuisaWorld)(similar here)/Celine shoes(similar here)/Saint Laurent bag/ Botier Official earing
Ph Haris Farsarakis

Hello from the beautiful Dallas and the awesome Reward Style conference. Currently enjoying/phototosynthezing the Texan sun and utterly motivated to talk about our summer’s hero pieces(and perhaps the winter’s ones if you’ll take a look at Isabel Marant’s newest collection) the striped dresses. Who wants a dress to wear everywhere?  Raise your hand! I’m pretty certain that all hands around this block are already up in the air. Your vehicle to drive you unmistakably around the day (or night) is printed…. horizontally. A refuge for the sleepy morning brain cells which do refuse to decide matchy matchy pieces or dinner outfits. Striped dresses are our not-so new hero pieces, our time savers, our chic boosters. Woo-hoo!
[one_half padding=”0 10px 0 0″][/one_half][one_half_last padding=”0 0px 0 10px”][/one_half_last][one_half padding=”0 10px 0 0″][/one_half][one_half_last padding=”0 0 0 10px”][/one_half_last]

Love that dress, almost Missoni like, but with that cool Celine touch, you look adorable!
Simona
Lake&Moon

You look amazing Evangelie! Love the dress and the captures!
http://www.stylelaboratoire.blogspot.com

Lovely dress!

x Krizia 

Shark Attack – Fashion Blog

This Céline dream is just a dream… I love it soooo much, I have seen it everywhere and to see you wear it, I realize I NEED it 🙂 Have fun in Dallas !

http://www.pardonmyobsession.com/

Love it ! Such pretty dress ! 

http://www.thefashionpanda.be
http://www.thefashionpanda.beRonald van der Kemp blouse|
 Ronald van der Kemp pants

Photography Haris Farsarakis

Emerging designers, or else the holly grail I’ve got to find. Oh yes I remember well the last time I’ve mentioned one on this space. It’s been Demna Gvasalia and Vetements, impressed at that point of time my newly acquired sweatshirt. Blonde…you had almost forgotten this right? I haven’t…I still remember how good it felt because YAS blondes do have much more fun.

Back to the serious talking… Ronald Van Der Kemp has been set my heart on fire. The man not only introduced the “demi-couture” to me with the incredible craftsmanship of his line, imagine that the RDVK pieces are sewn by hand but also reminded me again that extraordinary fashion has to do with extraordinary feelings. A line that takes you back to the romantic past, when the fashion houses actually cared about making you feel unique and not just a number in the vast mass with their impeccable tailoring and unique sewing. Take for example this marinière, looks familiarly fab but with a closer look you realize that it’s uncommonly fab as a mesh serves for the base of the silk panels to be carefully hand-stitched and not only cover your tities but also fit like a precious glove. Past techniques will light up the future of fashion and Ronald definitely knows this.

So pretty! Love this outfit

http://www.modishmuse.com





I really love going out by wearing only a stand-out lipstick. And by stand-out I mean a deep powerful shade, a lipstick that stays on the lips and doesn't move around (to your teeth etc). For this season my very favorite shades are from Chanel Rouge Allure Ink. They are super, super long lasting, matte but not dry. Depicted you can see my personal loves but also shades that I believe they match with every single skin. Enjoy.

From left clockwise.

AMOUREUX #140

 LIBERE #148

CHOQUANT #152

EXPERIMENTE #154

You've asked I listen...so on "Do it like E" posts we apply my favorite and super easy beauty tricks on different persons. Let's get started people with triangles. I'm always super lazy with my make-up and I have invented this way of going out wearing ONLY eyeliner and looking fresh. I just draw a small triangle ending exactly at the middle part of my lash line. That's it. It uplifts my eyes(and the whole face) making it look fresh n' sexy in no-time. Just remember to use the most stable eyeliner to avoid transferring to your upper eyelid. My favorite Calligraphie De Chanel n. 65 hyperblack. The best.

The most wanted lips created by Peter Philips with these simple steps: "Apply a beige pencil, this makes the lips dryer and erases the natural lip tone, that way you don't see the red of the lips underneath. Then you smoosh the glitter on, clean up the edges with clear tape, and finish by pressing a tissue over the mouth." There you have it. All shine.

Lip liner Charlotte Tilbury

Glitter OCC

A breath of freshness that radiates citrus, a sense that brought back all of my restless childhood memories. Happiness... that’s all a perfume is about right?


Valentino top(similar in pink)/Valentino denim pants/Valentino sunglasses/ Gianvito Rossi flats/ Marni bag

Ph Haris Farsarakis

The shooting took place at Hotel Infante Sagres in Porto, Portugal.
Is it only me or whenever you also touch linen,  your biological blaring alarm clock surprisingly does sound like summer? If hitting the snooze button for the 10th time is your go-to solution to forget sunny days, in our case it simply does not work. Linen is the rare case of material connected with only one season. The aforementioned.

And vice versa, when I’ve been packing for Portugal, in the back of my mind I had the tropics and that simultaneously resulted the first thing chosen for my trip… linen.  That doesn’t necessary means that I’ve actually met the tropics…It has been very pleasant weather-wise but when the sun  went down, well you needed an EXTRA jacket.

So how cool guys are the Azulejos or else the Portuguese tiles? This post could be a photo gallery dedicated to their art but on an unexpected turn of corner my back, the Mega-Valentino-T did steal the lights. And I am not the kind of a girl obsessed with how her back looks. Imagine when a hairdresser brings over the mirror to check how the haircut from behind this usually ends up with me hysterically laughing, I mean who checks your hair from behind? They might check other parts of your body but hair?!  However there comes the time when good photography reminds me….that back actually matters and in the future, my nervous breakdowns should be eliminated only when slicing onions….True story.


You can find my top linen choices from Valentino below.
[show_lookbook_widget id=”198681″]

Love this location! The colors are perfect. 

-M
http://www.violetroots.com




 

Valentino jacket(via LuisaWorld)/Anine Bing shirt/Cheap Monday denim/Altuzarra sandals/Celine bag(not the same at all yet I adore this)
Ph Haris Farsarakis
The only garment that could support nudity and I mean that even if you are naked inside, nobody would actually care. Happy first of March lil fellas and what a better way to start this month with a statement jacket, probably my favorite pieces of the wardrobe. Pieces that remove all the unnecessary brainstorming of what to wear as all they need to be matched with is the maximum simplicity. And you must know by now the motto of this blog, no? Simplicity IS the greatest ability, yes, yes so far we haven’t changed here. So if a single jacket creates a sense of an absolute need, it is the greatest of all. A turtleneck, a t-shirt or a buttoned down can be easily paired, with the only required premise to be monochrome.. Let your statement jacked do the monologue, I am sure everybody will love its loud voice.


And…just because I adore them, below is my top list of the spring statement jackets. Enjoy!
[show_lookbook_widget id=”193078″]

Love your style and true fashionista..
– fashionlove
http://www.fashionlove.com.au/

J’adore. The mix of the jacket and jeans are super inspiring. 

Romina | http://www.blaastyle.com

Really loving ALL the jackets in here!!! But then again, I just love your style, myStyle Heroine!

The jacket is to DIE for!
And I love your hair styled like this.

x Krizia 

Shark Attack – Fashion Blog

This is style what I like! So chic!
http://fiorelkasworld.com/

Who wouldn’t love a statement jacket? The details on this one are really nice.
-M
http://www.violetroots.com





[one_half][/one_half][one_half_last padding=”0 0 0 20px”][/one_half_last][one_half padding=”0 0 0 0x”][/one_half][one_half_last padding=”0 0 0 20px”][/one_half_last]Emilio Pucci dress/Lanvin flats

Ph Haris Farsarakis

*Lame(λαμέ): shiny fabrics or the excessive use of sequins(the Greek way)

Saturday night, my favorite day since I have actual memories and that tiny part of the week when my most beloved outfits got out of the closet for a stroll or for a dance marathon If I got lucky. And I really loved(and still love) to dance, have I ever told you that? WHEN on the dance floor I’ve had the energy of a Duracell bunny and Rihanna’s moves at the Barbados Carnival Parade. Blame it ONLY on my greek genes. My (very)dancing ones.
So this post is for all of you who ask me what to wear during the hottest nights of the week without feeling overdressed.
-Wait a minute lady, you are all over sequins and you are not feeling over-freakin-dressed? You must be drunk!
Well I am 100 percent alcohol free and I can reassure you that if you wear your most glamorous dress, the Holly Grail of your closet, your shine-bright-as-a-diamond armour(yes we listen a lot of Rihanna on this blog) paired with a simple, plain black pair of ballerinas then not only you won’t feel overdressed but you’ll also look as chic as one very modern Jackie-O. And even when it happens to be amongst the super tall Danes, like I was for the past few days, that’s not a bummer, you won’t be that dwarf, you’ll be the coolest million-dollar-babe ready who knows how to look beautiful even in loads  and I mean LOADS of sequins.

Love this pictures!! The dress is super cool!
http://www.thedoubledenim.com

This dress is just.. everything! I can’t even…. I love it!

http://www.Pepperdapper.com





Peter Jensen jumpsuit/ Louis Vuitton belt pouch/Chloe mules(here and here)/Linda Farrow sunglasses.

Ph Timur Emek

And I really wonder, are we, the sassy Greeks, the only ones in the planet who shamelessly pronounce the belt pouches as BANANAS?! I hope not, so you my preciosas, to be able to link somehow the tittle with the image without speculating that after Milan I just went BANANAS. Either way, my magic foggy sphere mysteriously predicts that the aforementioned outfit divider(obviously that’s the cause the depicted belt serves) will be a huge trend. The “look mum no hands” expression in a completely different demonstration. No bicycle needed.

Back in Milan’s steamy streets just an hour before the Stella McCartney Spring15 presentation, dressed in the most comfort way, a jumpsuit that is. This Italian city doesn’t come easy with summer. That translates into heat and mosquitoes, a terribly nasty combination for sweetblooded girls like me. I did saved my hands though from a dot-ed disaster yet that did not applied on my legs. I still have the marks of Milan on my limbs but I also have another ones, those forever kept in my brain cells. Memories…

The Stella McCartney Spring15 presentation took place at “Orto Botanico” the botanic gardens, as the name implies, by the side of Bvlgary hotel. From a distance, the dramatic entry with Stella’s flowered-pink letters, the long fenced lush plants complex and the scattered candle lights made me think of a countryside party. But once I stepped through the last bushes the true “spirit” of the evening showed up. McCartney’s models impeccably dressed with the designer’s spring 15 collection, cheerfully interacting with the crowd. I seriously love this new coolness of presenting collections. It’s like a refuge from the metal glare of the cities. Some precious moments, quality if you may, to indulge into the fresh collection. The outfits themselves were absolutely beautiful. McCartney’s heroines, superheroes was actually this season’s theme, were strong yet fragile. Feminin yet a bit boyish. But above all they were happy, happy girls in their clothes’ absolute comfort. As we all should be.

Let my paparazzi skills speak for themselves.



 

ah those mules are just perfection <3





Etoile Isabel Marant jumpsuit(also in khaki)/ Louis Vuitton belt/Converse trainers/ Saint Laurent bag(Inside the ALMOST fishnet)/Ray-Ban sunglasses

Ph Jeff Thibodeauco

It’s almost midnight, I’m almost hungry (because just a few days earlier it was a reasonable time for someone to eat lunch on the other side of the pond), I am almost sure that my depicted jumpsuit needed some ironing done and IT’S DEFINITELY SURE THAT I DONT HAVE ENOUGH TIME TO PACK. Leaving again in just seven hours and you can see still totally empty my luggage’s bottom. Bottom’s up guys let’s have  a wine and make it fast. Wine gives you wings to fly!

 

 




You wear jumpsuits like no one else’s business ! Looking fierce, and that LV  belt is awesome !

http://www.pardonmyobsession.com/

Adore the fabrication of the jumpsuit, it looks like it contains linen??? Like how you’ve kept the styling simple.
Hugs Adele xoxo

Yes it has Adele! Good eyes 😉

golden hour for a golden outfit ! 

http://franchemeetsfashion.blogspot.cz/

In love with this jumpsuit. It’s so urban style!
http://www.mybubblyzone.com/

love it!

http://mancinasspot.blogspot.com/

Completely in love with this jumpsuit right now…..The perfect trans-seasonal piece! xx

So cool! Love the jumpsuit!
xx
Claudia
http://www.trendenciesblog.com

Great jumpsuit and styling!

http://www.julialundin.com





Ph Jordan Makarof

Makeup & hair Stellar

I’m extremely proud to present to you my first capsule collection, I’ve designed for Tom Wood, the originally jewlery mega-brand which is now expanding to the clothing industry. My favorite Scandis will make their market debut with two lines: The namesake one, a men and women minimalistic collection and the Heroine by Tom Wood, 10 cleaned lined pieces that were always on the top of my wish list. 10 pieces that could be worn in multiple ways yet all destined to make us all feel comfortably confident.

So how have they all started…Well in May 2012 Mona Jensen, Tom Wood’s owner and creative director contacted me to design a jewelry line for her then soon-to-be launched brand. I felt really honored but not yet ready to design jewelry. However with clothes was another story. It’s something that probably in my genes. From age zero, it felt natural to design outfits. I had even created my own mini-line when I was in high school with a local seamstress. It was good I’m telling you, at least I had totally enjoyed it. So when we hooked up again with TW team during the last NY fashion week, as we were discussing of how much our fashion aesthetics do match up, they popped up the question to me: design my first capsule collection. As far as I remember it didn’t need that much time to decide. I was already a big fan of Tom Wood’s signet lines and the proposal was dreamy. Not  to co-design or just put my name on a label. To put my whole soul, the whole me. And I’m really so thankful for that. So thankful that Mona believed in me and trusted that we both, together, we could make a miracle happen. So here it is, the Heroine by Tom Wood, a collection of pieces that ALL have a story behind, stories that I will reveal one by one in the near future.

 

perfect, I want them all, please more photos!

Awesome collection!
You did an amazing job.

x Krizia

Shark Attack – Fashion Blog

Congrats!! These pieces are  definetely having your `signature`

RedheadIllusion.com

THE BEST CLOTHES





Ph Haris Farsarakis

Black boot Chloe, Snake-skin boot Isabel Marant, Burgundy boot Marni (all via Luisa World)

And god created the medium heel!

Or better one major army of the “in-between” feet-supports because the medium heeled boots, yes my friends are so trending for the upcoming season. And it was about time if you ask me. In fact I’ve always wondered why the four-to-eight-cm were until lately a rare species for the design houses. It’s been always flat or hight. All or nothing. However the new medium size adjustment  to the heel gives form to our everyday comfiness and highlights a certain vision of femininity. For me our boot-to-go shouldn’t resemble to a basketball player’s pair of kicks to look cool and feel comfy too. It should be this kind of boot that of course it would be majorly walkable yet with an addition that should give to the silhouette a flattering and elegant notion. And this addition is no other than this specific MEDIUM heel. Our feet will not suffer anymore just to look feminine YAYYYYY….the new season’s must have is made for walking and they simply adore it.

 

You can find my favourite medium-helled boots below:

[show_boutique_widget id=”285655″]

lovely selection
Xoxo
http://fashion backyard.blogspot.com

Cool picks, love the style for the upcoming Fall ! You’ll wear them perfectly I’m sure 🙂

http://www.pardonmyobsession.com/

Seriously feeling excited about this heel height!! The Isabel Marant pair are gorrrrgeous! I Love the heel height so much! 

Shot From The Street | Fashion Blog

Hi Evangelie! I for one am so pleased about this trend. I’m fancying a pair of snakeskin boots – love your choices!
Hugs Adele xoxo

stunning picks!

https://carbonconcept.blogspot.com

A.W.A.K.E blouse|
 Levis vintage denim|
 Balenciaga booties

Photography Haris Farsarakis

If you think about it,  A.W.A.K.E brand has been created by Natalia Alaverdian just after a year I have started working on this space, thus you can’t call it actually new. However if a piece of cloth makes you wanna go pole-swirling in the middle of the street, at rush hour, then that might meaning something about this brand. So meet the not only emerging but skyrocketing  A.W.A.K.E. Enjoy!

Hello I am so glad I found your site, I really found you by accident, while I
was looking on Google for something else, Regardless I am here now and would just like to say thanks for a incredible post
and a all round enjoyable blog (I also love the theme/design), I don’t have time to read through it all at
the minute but I have saved it and also included your RSS feeds,
so when I have time I will be back to read a great deal
more, Please do keep up the superb job.

love everything about this look – those gold shoes are gorg!!
xoxo
http://www.lovekept.co.uk

love the post
You have to check out this blog, http://www.wonderedwhispers.blogspot.com





Tote Smythson

Ph Alex F. Bag close-up by me.

I must have a packing syndrome. I honestly don’t know its name, yet there must be a word written about it in the psychology glossaries. That is when you pack your whole house, in the fear of missing something during your vacation. Yeap I’m a heavy-weight traveler. Except from one thing through: My bag. It is weird but when it comes to bags I try to take one (or maximum two with me) for all circumstances. From day to-night, to the beach or to our evening stroll. One hell of a multitasker. The “one”  that saved during my recent Southeast Asia trip was the depicted Smythson. A white large tote with a wave of canary-yellow inside, in other words a Kinder surprise. And you know how much I love surprises! Seriously!

 

We are in love with this bag!

Pretty bag!

x Krizia

Shark Attack – Fashion Blog

Cool photos!
XO CHAMAFASHION
http://www.chamafashion.com/

Looks so relaxing!!

http://fashionandsounds.com/

Adore the colour of your tote, I remember entering the comp to win one but was sooo gutted I didn’t win!!!
Btw the hammock looks so inviting!
Hugs xoxo
http://www.intotheblonde.com/





 

Special Edition FelderFelder for Silhouette sunglasses, Valentino dress, Valentino bag.
Ph Melanie Galea
No mom as much as you try to brainwash me, I have not returned back to my natural roots. The depicted awesomely sunwear-ed me is looking back to the previous fashion week, when the super talented Melanie Galea  shot me at the undoubtedly most beautiful bridge in Paris, Pont Alexandre III.

The Felder twins translated their signature style into a bespoke selection of glasses called Special Edition FelderFelder for Silhouette and me and Melanie found the chance to celebrate it just after the magical Valentino show dressed in the House’s stealthy perfection. Looking back, I am so looking forward to times like these….


I love you so much better with darker hair *-*

Wow, classy and cool! I love your make up, thats perfection!

http://fiorelkasworld.com/
Bag J.W Anderson|
 Top J.W Anderson|
 Denim Stella McCartney|
 Shoes Celine
 Photography Haris Farsarakis
 Creative direction and styling Evangelie Smyrniotaki

What really makes an IT bag? When it stands out from a cactus pear overpopulation then here you have IT.
I’m joking guys however if my instincts still work well what remains solid true from the previous sentence is that the J.W.Anderson Pierce bag will indeed be the newest universal LOVE. On 19th May MATCHESFASHION.COM exclusively launched this bag as part of its Digital Trunk Show hub and gave the chance to some of lucky ones to experience Anderson’s awesome piercing first, before the rest of the world. Let me say this, the bag itself is the coolest brown bag I’ve seen lately and almost the coolest pierced person (yes you’ve heard well I treat my bags humanely, we also have dialogue some times) I’ve met this year. And cool beings shall always stay in our lives. Even under an avalanche of cactuses.

Absolutely stunning pictures!
http://www.runwaycatalog.com

Absolutely beautiful!!!

https://yaslifetyle.wordpress.com/?ref=spelling

Beautiful photos!
http://ellenvicius.com/jackie-1497.html
XOXO

The photos are absolutely gorgeous. I love the outfit, it looks elegant, unique and full of personality, very bold!

xoxo
– Jennifer http://bohobags.com

Happy to see your articles’re back!! Beautiful as always 🙂

hehehehe





Haider Ackermann jacket(SS 13, found it at an insane sale price when in Departement Feminin)/Dries Van Noten shirt (similar here)/Mih-Jeans denim(new favorite)/Acne shoes/Jil Sander belt/Maison Mischel hat(same in grey also check this)

Now hear me out. I might not speak that loud during this Malaysian midnight yet I’ll try to be clear. There’s not any secret for turning the extreme frizzy dehydrated locks into straight ones(I adore straight hair) without using a dryer. We, the hair-balls, are on another level people. The medusa(s) level. Not any available technological advances are made for us yet. To be honest with you I have tried the Brazilian blow dry in the past but from shoulder and below…destruction…chaos…embers..do I need to say more? Plus If I haven’t already told you I’m hypochondriac and all these stories about the potential cancer risk had creeped me out. Just wear a hat girls. It works. Oh and straighten a bit your ends. It helps when you want to have a nice braid.

Enough with the hair-talk. Still in Malaysia, today we’ had our first burger! Don’t dare to judge me about my newscast! Life is pretty easy here. Not much drama..Well, except from the fact that my stomach is going to explode by the extensive use of Malaysian spices. Five days in a row are more than enough for my body’s, probably, most fragile area(my heart is excluded :p) . So the Pangkor Laut facilitates five restaurants with my favorite one, the Straits, a gourmet restaurant to dine in private booths literally on the rocks. A bit overpriced if you ask me, always judging by the Malaysian currency and the country’s economy. Apart from that the food was fab and the location insane!

You know the drill…it’s late..i have to go to sleep or else I might a need a helmet to look descent in the pics tomorrow….Goodnight…

amazing!!!

scorttarius-style.blogspot.com

gorgeous!

http://thedaydreamings.blogspot.de

Looks lovely !
http://www.thefashionpanda.be
http://www.thefashionpanda.be

Amazing

XO CHAMA FASHION
http://www.chamafashion.com

Fab as usual!

x Krizia

Shark Attack – Fashion Blog





 


Jumpsuit Current Elliott,(also here), size down, here on size 0(check it in denim)/Tee Acne(favorite basic)/Boots Chanel/bag Smythson/Mono-earring Louis Vuitton.

Outfit pics Alex F, the rest by me.

Two words with a tab in the middle: Recovery-mode. There must be a pill.. A pill that instantly vanish your jet lag. If it really exists and it’s not my wild imagination’s yet another product , I’d like to know it…please!

Thewhole following week we will be all passengers in time, when I’ll take you back to my then tropical state of mind. It was my seventh time in Singapore. Seventh, I cannot believe that I’m actually saying that number or that it has been my 11th anniversary with my husband. 11 years together and while for some might seem like a lifetime, for me it feels like yesterday. Time passes quickly guys. But what is really time?  I have convinced myself that is just a human invention existing to stress us and put us in “boxes”. Can you imagine your life without the significant  existence of the time counter? Life as it supposed to be. Measured with feelings.

I suppose that all being mentioned above are obviously the side effects of my jet-lag. Anyway back at that day in Singapore and my usual habit to wear jumpsuits. Logically you’ll ask me:

Is n’t it too warm to wear in Singapore?

May I  answer with a question? Have you ever been inside a building in Singapore? The cold is insane. It’s like a local conspiracy to have the A/C on the skin-preserving-mode. Zero celsius that is. No joke. Thus these cotton Current Elliott all-in-ones were somehow  perfect for the circumstance. And while struggling to preserve my body temperature, I’ve unexpectedly found my number one wish on my fall list. It seems that they’d stocked earlier that the other capitals and the Louis Vuitton mono-earring was surprising available. Available and light-weight! Yes!!  My ears won’t suffer for fashion. Actually that’s partially true because my earring hole was closed in the back and my suffering while attempting to reopen it was insane. I had almost forgotten how massive the piercing pain was. And I have 10 ear holes, I should have known better(obviously the 8 of them closed)! While the salesman was watching me with terror, almost to bend the earring, he had the brilliant idea to bring over another pair of studs that could help for a better ear-drilling. After endless ear poking with a few breaks to pray….well that was it…the studs saved the day…

 

 

 

Congrats on your anniversary with your husband! LOve a good jumpsuit, Current/Elliott sure makes the best ones, so easy and yet not easy to pull it off so beautifully!
Simona
Lake&Moon

That jumpsuit is so on trend, love it!

notjessfashion.com

You are totally rocking this military jumpsuit, the boots are a perfect match for it. I’ve also been to Singapore so I totally get you on the air con!! I also get you on time, I’ve been with my husband 18 years (married for 15 years) & I still can’t believe it when I say it!
Hugs xoxo
http://www.intotheblonde.com/

You are genious

You are genious !

Awesome outfit, love the jumpsuit!

xoxo, Diana
http://www.TheNeonFactor.com


<3!!!
V.
http://lavsphere.blogspot.fr/

 

